**LETTER XII.**

**TO HIS SISTER.**

BEYROUT,

MY DEAR ELIZA, 	8th July, 1839.

I wrote to you all from the foot of Mount Carmel. This letter will reach you as soon, for the steamboat is riding in the bay, and does not sail for a few days. I write you now very hastily, that you may know our movements, and how kindly God has dealt with us hitherto. When I wrote you last. I told you that we intended to visit Tiberias and Saffet immediately after leaving quarantine. We did not do so. You axe aware that God is desolating this land with at least two of his dreadful weapons  plague and war. We have left the first, we hope, behind us. The second we are advancing upon. In consequence of the war in the north, we heard that the Druses, a wild people of Mount Lebanon, had risen, and that the Bedouins were scouring the country seeking prey. These reports made us think it more prudent to go direct to Beyrout by water. We therefore left Mount Carmel quarantine on Monday last; and after visiting the Jews in Kaiffa, the neighbouring town, embarked in one of the native boats. I can assure you I was much grieved to think of missing the Jews of Galilee, and the sight of the sea on which the Saviour walked. We had a sad rocking in the boat for 25 hours, which was relieved now and then by a sight of some interesting Scripture place. We sailed by Acre, the ancient Ptolemais (Acts xxi. 7), where Paul staid one day. We came by evening to Tyre, of which you read much in the Prophets, Isaiah xxiii., and also an interesting story in Acts xxi. It is the very shore where Paul and the Tyrian Christians kneeled. The next morning we awoke opposite Sidon; and by I o'clock landed in Beyrout. I have seldom seen a more lovely place than this. The town is thriving; the bazaars are lively. Outside the walls there are pleasant mulberry gardens, where the silkworm spins its tiny web. A solitary cypress stands among the Arab tombs. The sea is truly beautiful; and Lebanon towers over all   splendid mountain, with snow lying in its crevices. Lebanon recalls many interesting things. You remember Moses prayed that he might go over Jordan to see that goodly mountain and Lebanon; and he saw it from the top of Pisgah. You remember Solomon got all his cedarwood from its forests, I Kings iii.; and again you remember the Prophet says, that in a little while Lebanon shall become a fruitful field. We have had the pleasure once more of resting in an inn, and sleeping in a bed, the first time (but one) since leaving Egypt. The missionaries are Americans  nice, good men; and we have met here with 4 converted Jews.

You will have heard, probably, of the great battle that has been fought near Aleppo, and of the complete victory which Ibrahim has gained over the Sultan. 180 pieces of cannon have been taken, and 15,000 men, it is said, made prisoners. The Sultan is now very unwell, and it is feared may die in the meantime. This battle has completely quieted the country. The accounts of its troubled state were quite exaggerated; and now the Druses and Bedouins have slunk back into their caves. The guns of all the towns have been firing for three days; and there have been rejoicings and illuminations for three days and three nights. There being now no danger, and many of our companions in quarantine having been at Tiberias since the disturbances, we intend to proceed thither today. Our valuable fellowtraveller, Dr Black, has for some time felt the heat of Syria and the mode of travelling too much for him. He is too stout for such a climate; and, though still quite well, yet fears he might not be able to undergo further fatigue. He and Dr Keith have accordingly resolved on returning by the Danube. We felt sorry indeed to part; but, for the sake of our great cause and of his health, I believe it is our only duty. We saw them on board the Austrian steamer yesterday, which will arrive at Smyrna in 4 days. They will proceed by Constantinople up the Danube, and then across to the Rhine; and so they may reach home with hardly any land travelling, which is very needful to the Doctor's comfort. He has already performed good service in the cause; and I trust will reach home in safety. They promised to see you in passing through Edinburgh; as they will probably be a month before us.

Andrew and I feel that more is cast upon us now, so that we have more to cast upon God, who careth. for us. We have got a converted Jew engaged to go with us, a most interesting young man of the name of Calman. We met him in London, and here again. He has. laboured five years in Palestine, and is much and justly esteemed. He speaks Arabic, Polish, German, &c.; so that we shall be better off than over in regard to making enquiries. We propose, if God direct our steps, to sleep tonight near Sidon; tomorrow morning to visit the synagogue, and proceed to Tyre; then across to Tiberias, where are 1000 Jews; then to spend Saturday and Sabbath in Saffet. Next week we shall return to this place by Damascus. The Austrian steamer sails again on the 28th. We purpose to sail by it for Smyrna and Constantinople.. From that we proceed by land through Bucharest, Jassy, Lublin, Cracow, Warsaw, Posen, Berlin, Hamburgh, Hull, Edinburgh. We know not what a day may bring forth, but we trust that our way homeward may be prospered. My health is now decidedly better. A Jewish physician here (a convert) encouraged me much about my health, he having had the same complaint himself. He thinks the travelling will be very beneficial. The only new trouble that has come upon me is deafness in one ear. Had I acquired it when sleeping on the ground, I would have attributed it to that; but I got it within this last week, sleeping in a comfortable bed. I hope it will go away as quietly as it came. Andrew is quite well; and we are standing the heat much better now, Beyrout is the hottest place in Syria. Dr Black preached yesterday, before sailing, in the American Consul's; we had the Communion afterwards at the Mission-house. It was pleasant to join in that holy service with so many of different persuasions. There were more than 20 turbans  two that had been Armenian Bishops  Bishop Karavet and Bishop Yakob, with venerable beards    one Abyssinian  several Greek Catholics  Presbyterians Congregational, and Church of Scotland and 4 converted Jews.

Now, my dear Eliza,  how are you coming on in my absence? and how are you all?  Do you hear still from Miss Carnegy? I am truly thankful to think that they are so well supplied in my absence. Perhaps my great Master will fully recover me, and I shall preach among them once more the unsearchable riches of Christ. I sometimes think I set my heart too much upon this; and that God has sent me away to teach me that He can save and feed the people without any help of mine; and that His will, not my will, must be done. I fear I shall not be back till the end of October, if all shall go on safely, so that I must devolve my Communion again on some of my friends. I may be in time for it; but in case I should not., it will be better to ask some one to undertake it. You know it is the last Sabbath of October. What I propose is, that Mr Mellis should preach the forenoon of the Fast, Mr Moody the afternoon and evening. I mean to ask John Bonar to undertake the principal part on Sabbath, Horatius Bonar to preach on the Saturday and Sabbath evening. Robert Macdonald will undertake Sabbath tables, and the Monday. I shall try and write to all these myself, bidding them all write to my father, whether they can undertake it or no. In case of any declining, you must just use all your discretions to find out suitable labourers to fill their place. I would like Cumming to be asked, if John Bonar declines.

Now, dear Eliza, may your soul prosper and be in health. I commend you all to Him whom Jesus called your father and my father. If you have all a saying heart  acceptance of Christ as the Lord our Righteousness, all is well; without it, we shall surely perish. Every step I take makes Christ more precious. Indeed I should be miserable had I not a Father near. Commend me again to all dear friends. Kiss one another for me; and believe me ever your affectionate brother,

ROBT. MURRAY M'CHEYNE.

We intend to part with some of our portmanteaus; sending them home by sea to Liverpool, then to Leith.   Farewell.

My dear Eliza,  I have written half a letter to John Bonar, but a converted Jew has interrupted me, and now the hour is come we must ride. Our horses are at the door. If I leave this letter till I come back to Beyrout, he will not receive it for another month, that is, till September. I do not like to send him a hurried line from this land, and must therefore postpone it. Perhaps, then, my father will write to him, urging my earnest request, that he will, in case of my not arriving, dispense the Communion. Perhaps also he will invite Mr Moody. Explain to him why I have not written him. I shall write him my very first leisure. He may write H. Bonar of Kelso also. Mellis and Macdonald I will undertake. The Lord watch over you again. My dear Eliza, yours.

I plucked a rose of Sharon for you, and concealed it under my saddle, but, alas, it dropped. I am of opinion that the rose of Sharon is the splendid rhododendron, or rosetree, which blooms there in magnificent profusion. It is, like Christ, altogether lovely.
