LETTER I.

TO HIS FAMILY.

MY DEAR FATHER, MOTHER, AND SISTER *March 29, 1839, 8 o'clock*, A.M. 

I begin this letter in the steam-boat, that I may be able to put it in the Post-Office to-night. If this were not the middle of the sea, 10 miles off the Nore, I would say that I ought to raise an Ebenezer, or stone of help, for "hitherto hath the Lord helped me." The day we left you was a very pleasant one indeed. The evening was quite beautiful, and scarcely a ripple on the Forth. I enjoyed the sight of the Bass Rock very much, and thought of the holy men who had found there a prison house and a home. What a different voyage I and my brethren are going; not to be imprisoned for the truth, but to try and bring it within reach of the prisoners of Israel. You would be quite thankful, mamma, if you saw that lonely rock, that your son is free, and not a prisoner there. We dined at 4, and then walked on the deck till 8. The moon gave light all the night. The sea continued perfectly calm, and I went to rest in my crib about 10. Yesterday morning I arose at 7, and found that we were opposite Whitby. It seemed a nice looking old town, with its castle or cathedral frowning over the deep. The morning was dull, but soon cleared up into a most beautiful day. The sea was perfectly calm, like a mill49;pond, the whole day and night. Nobody on board has been the least sick. The coast is not very interesting, and we were some time out of sight of land all round. This is the first time in my life I ever was so, and I thought upon the world of waters. I occupied myself in watching the sea49;gulls. Two followed the ship a long way : they did not fly straight, but hither and thither, still following. I thought on the way a believing soul follows the Saviour - hovering, yet following. We had some heavy showers, but a perfect calm. The company on board are very pleasant people. The Misses C. I find exceedingly agreeable, especially the youngest, who seems a very devoted Christian. But the most interesting person to me is a young Jew, Mr T. I observed him opposite to me at dinner the first day, and by his beautiful features at once, recognised a son of Abraham. Next morning, before breakfast, he happened to sit near to me. I said, "Do you know the Hebrew language?" He looked very surprised, and said, "O yes." I asked him if he were not of the Hebrews; he said "Yes," and wondered how I knew. He said many people would not believe he was a Jew, even when he told them. I asked if he would like to return to Jerusalem. He scoffed, and said "No." He cared nothing about it. He had been strictly brought up 'by his parents till 18 years old. Being then at liberty, he had gone to America, and learned to cast off Moses and the Prophets. He is a complete infidel 49; a fashionable looking youth. He says a great many Jews are of his way of thinking. He was a little interested to hear of our expedition, and has paid marked attention to me ever since, sitting next me at table. He ate ham this morning, telling me at the same time with a leer, "Now, this is wrong." I told him I saw no harm in that; but I blamed him for not reading the Bible. He gave me the address of the two London synagogues and the Jewish bookseller, and a good deal of information. I hope to have another talk with him more seriously still before we part. He told me he could not sleep last night, and asked me if I thought it was because of a troubled conscience. We had beautiful moonlight last night. I watched the different light-houses till dark, and then, when at Cromer Point, committing myself, and you, and all, into the hand of Him who holds the winds in his fist and the waters in the hollow of his hand, I went to sleep. Slept very comfortably till 7. A drizzling rain this morning opposite Harwich. We are now entering the Nore. 

11 *o'clock*. -- We are now sailing rapidly up the Thames. We have had truly a merciful passage; not a wave the whole way. I feel a great deal the better of the voyage. The palpitation has quite left me. I will finish this in London. I am glad to see the trees again, on the coast of Kent and Surrey. I have had another interesting conversation with the Jew, which has made him a little more serious. Is it not curious that I should be brought into contact with an Israelite so early in my pilgrimage? I rather think my maps are left behind; at least I cannot find them in my large portmanteau. Perhaps you will send them by Andrew. 

I hope you will take good care of one another while I am away, not forgetting the soul, which is of eternal importance. O to have a healthy soul, forgiven and sanctified ! This is durable riches. Give Andrew my kindest regards. I shall long anxiously for his arrival, and that of our Fathers; I know not how I am to get on in London without them. I pray God to direct my way. If he has something for us to do for his Israel, I am persuaded he will. 

*Hampstead Heath,* 5 *o'clock*. -- I safely arrived here half-anhour ago, am quite well, and have been received by Mrs Tate, as if I were her eldest son returning from India. This is a delightful place; and her, kindness makes me feel quite happy 

Surely the Lord has been preparing the way. He that loves Israel is opening a way for his poor servants. I add no more, as old ministers say, except to pray that God may watch over you night and day. 

Your affectionate son,

ROBT. MURRAY M'CHEYNE. 
