{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1 \deff0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f192\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f193\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}
{\f195\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f196\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f197\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f198\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}
{\f199\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;
\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}{\s15\qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext15 Body Text;}}{\info{\author Haslam}{\operator Haslam}{\creatim\yr2001\mo11\dy10\hr16\min6}{\revtim\yr2001\mo11\dy10\hr16\min28}{\version11}{\edmins22}{\nofpages4}{\nofwords3023}
{\nofchars17233}{\nofcharsws21163}{\vern8269}}\paperw16834\paperh11909\margl1080\margr1080\margt720\margb720 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\horzdoc\dghspace120\dgvspace120\dghorigin1701
\dgvorigin1984\dghshow0\dgvshow3\jcompress\viewkind1\viewscale84\viewzk2\nolnhtadjtbl \fet0\sectd \lndscpsxn\sbknone\linex0\sectdefaultcl {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang
{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang
{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain 
\qc \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\tqr\tx5081\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 LETTER IX.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\tqr\tx5081\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\tqr\tx5081\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs16\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 TO HIS FAMILY.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\tqr\tx5081\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs16\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\tx3540\tqr\tx13680\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs16\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 MY DEAR FATHER, MOTHER, \tab \tab MOUNT CARMEL,
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\tx3540\tqr\tx5081\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs16\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\tx3570\tqr\tx13680\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs16\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 AND SISTER, \tab \tab }{\i\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 26th June, 1839.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\tx3570\tqr\tx5081\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs16\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 IT }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 is a long time since I 
have been able to write to you, this being the very first time since leaving Egypt that any one has appeared to carry letters for
 us. I must therefore begin by telling you that, by the good hand of our God upon me, I am in excellent health, and have been ever since I wrote you last. Fatigues we have had many, and much greater than I anticipated. Hardships and dangers we have also e
ncountered; but God has brought us all safely through, and in fully better condition than when we began. You must not imagine that I have altogether lost the palpitation of my heart, for it often visits me to humble and prove me. Still I 
believe it is a great deal better than it was, and its visits are not nearly so frequent. I hope very much, that in a cold bracing climate, and with less fatigue, I 
may perhaps not feel it at all. I was very thankful to receive your letter, dated 8th May, the first since lea
ving home. I was delighted to hear of your health and safety, and of the peaceful communion of St Peter's. The public news was alarming and humbling.* I suppose I 
had better begin at the beginning, and go over all our journeyings from the land of Egypt thr
ough the howling wilderness to this sweet land of promise. I would have written journalwise, as mamma would say, from time to time, so that I might have had an interesting budget of news ready; but you must remember it is a more fatiguing thing to ride 12
 or 14 hours on a camel's back in a sandy wilderness, than in our home excursions; and I could often do nothing more than lie down on my rug and fall asleep.
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\i\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 Alexandria, }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 16th May 1839. \_ We left Alexandria on the 16th, parting from many kind friends in that 
strange city. We and our baggage were mounted on 17 donkeys, like the sons of Jacob when they carried corn out
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }{\fs16\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 * He alludes here to the decision of the House of Lords in the Auchterarder case.
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par 26th.\_The Sabbath dawned sweetly. Therm. 92\'ba in tent; could only lie on the mat and read Psalms. Evening, gathered Governor and Bedouins  to hear some words of eternal life, Ibrahim interpreting.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 27th. \_ Two very long stages brought us to Katieh (see map). Thankful to God for. his goodness while we pitched by the date trees.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 28}{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\super\langnp2057 th}{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057  \_ Spent the day at Katieh. Interesting interviews with the G
overnor, a kind Arab. Therm. 96\'ba in tent. Same evening proceeded 6 hours through 'a greener desert, among flocks of goats and sheep, and encamped by a well, Bir\_el\_Abd.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 29th. \_ An
other hot day in the desert. Came in sight of the sea, which gave us a refreshing breeze; bathed in a salt lake as hot as a warm bath. Encampment at Abugilbany.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 30th. \_ This was our last day in the Egyptian wilderness. We entered on a much more mountainou
s region. The heat very great; we literally panted for a breath of wind. The Bedouins begged handkerchiefs to cover their heads, and often cast themselves under a bush for shade. Towards sunset we came down on the old ruins of Rhinoculura, now buried in t
he sand; and soon after our camels kneeled down at the gates of E1 Arish, the last town of the Egyptian frontier.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 31st. \_ We spent in El Arish, being unable to get fresh camels. We bought a sheep for 5s.\_drank freely of their delightful water; what a bless
ing after the desert}{\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 ! F}{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 ound out the river of Egypt, the boundary of Judah mentioned in the Bible, quite dry.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\i\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 E1Arish, }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 lst June.\_Visited the school\_a curiosity. All the children sit cross\_
legged on the floor, rocking to and fro, repeating something in Arabic. We had a curious interview with the Governor, sitting in the gate in the ancient manner. We are quite expert now at taking off our shoes and sitting in the Eastern mode. \_ Smok}{
\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 ing, }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 and coffee in very small cups, are the constant accompaniments of these
 visits. Left the same evening, and did not reach Sheikh Juidhe, in the land of the Philistines, till the sun was just bursting into view.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 2d June. \_ Spent a happy Sabbath here. Sung in Judah's land, God is well known." Singing praises in our tent is, ver
y sweet ; they are so frail like our mortal bodies; they rise easily into the ears of our present Father. Our journey through the land of the Philistines }{\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 *an truly }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 pleasant.

\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 3d. \_ We went through a fine pasture country; immense straths, flocks of sheep and goats, and asses and camels, often came in sight. This is the very way up }{
\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 out }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 of Egypt.' little changed from the day that the Ethiopian went on his way rejoicing, and Joseph and Mary carried down the babe from the anger of Herod. \_Little changed! did
 I say ? it is all changed. No more is there one brook of water. The river of Egypt, wady Gaza, Eschol, Sorek\_
every brook we crossed was dried up; not a drop of water. The land is changed; no more is it the rich land of Philistia; the sand struggles with the grass for mastery. The cities are changed; where are they? the people are changed ;\-
no wore of Egypt. Our saddle was our bedding, namely, a rug to lie on, a }{\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 pillow }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 for the head, and a quilt to wrap ourselves in, We added afterwards a straw mat to put below 
all. . We had procured two tents, one large one and a small one, which, Andrew and I occupy. The donkeys are nice, nimble, little animals, going about 4 miles on hour. A wild Arab accompanies each donkey. We have our two Arab servants, to whom I 
now introduce you\- Ibrahim, a handsome small\_
made Egyptian, and Achmet, the cook, a dark, ~natured, fellow, with a white turban. and bare black legs. Ibrahim speaks a little English and Italian ; Achmet, Italian, in addition to their native Arabic'. I soon made frie
nds with him& with our Arab. donkey\_men, learning Arabic words }{\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 and }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
from them, which pleased them greatly. We journeyed by the bay of Aboukir, close by the sea, which tempered the air of the desert. At night we reached Rosetta, a curious half\_inhabited East
ern town. We saw an Eastern marriage. which highly pleased us, illustrating the parables; it was by torchlight. We slept in the convent.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 Rosetta, 17th \_May.\_\_Spent the morning in Rosetta; gave the monk a New Testament ; saw some of Egyptian misery in the 
Bazaar; saw the people praying in the mosque\_Friday being the Moslems' day of devotion. In the evening, we crossed the Nile in small boats, }{\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 which }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
mamma would abhor. It is a fine river; and its water, when }{\i\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 filtered, is }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 sweet and pleasant. We often thought upon it }{\i\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 in }{
\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 the desert. We slept that night on the sand }{\i\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 in our }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 tents by the sea\_shore.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\i\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 Bourlos, 18th }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 May. ~ In 6 hours we came to Bourlos}{\fs14\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057  }{
\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 (you will see it in the map of the Society for Diffusion of Useful Knowledge) ; we were ferried across. Watched fisherm
en casting their nets into the sea; hot, hot ! In 2 hours more, through a pleasant, palmy wilderness, came to Balteen, the vale of figs \_
 an Arab village of mud huts. You little know what an Arab house is. In general in Egypt it is an exact square box, made of mud, with a low hole for a door. The furniture is a mat and cooking things\_an oven made of mud at the door.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\i\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 Balteen, 19th }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 May. \_
 Spent our Sabbath unoccupied midst of the village. The poor Arabs have no Sabbath. The thermometer 84\'ba in tent. The Govern
or called in the evening, and drank a cup of tea with great relish. The heat we felt very much all day; still it was sweet to rest, and remember you all in the wilderness.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\tx450\tx705\tqr\tx5174\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 20th. \_ At 12 at night left Balteen by beautiful moonlight, proceeding through a pl
easant African wild palms and brushwood. We reached the sea in 2 hours, rode along its  
\par waves washing our feet ; very, sleepy.  We got a rest at mid\-day, if rest it could be called, under that scorching run, which I never will forget. Proceeding onwards, 
at 3 we left the seashore, and perceived the minarets of Damietta before us. The mirage cheated us often when we were very thirsty. We crossed the Nile again, a much smaller branch, the only remaining\tab 
one, and soon found ourselves comfortably reclining on the divan of the British Vice\_
consul, an Egyptian gentleman of some fortune and manners. He entertained us to supper in true Egyptian style; provided a room for us, where we spread our mats in peace. We spent the whole of the next day here, having sent of 
a Bedouin to have camels waiting us at San. The Consul entertained us in the same Egyptian style of hospitality, and sent us away, the next day, on board of a barge upon Lake Menzaleh. Even you, Eliza, would not have been afraid to sail upon that lake. It
 is no where more than 10 feet deep, and, in general, only 4 or 5. We made an awning }{\fs14\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 with }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
our mats, and spent a very happy day. At evening we entered a canal among immense reeds. In moonlight, the scene was truly romantic. We slept moored to the shore all night.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 23d May. \_
 Reached San about 10 in the morning. This evening we spent in exploring the ruins of the ancient Zoan; for this we find is the very spot. Wandering alone, we were quite surprised to find great mounds of brick, and pottery, and vitrified s
tones. An. drew at last came upon some beautiful obelisks.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 24th. \_
 In the morning we examined all carefully; found two sphinxes, and many Egyptian obelisks, How wonderful to be treading over, the ruins of the ancient capital of Egypt. Isaiah xix. 12.\_\_\_\_ "Where are the princes of Zoan ?"  Ezekiel xxx. 14.\-
"God has set fire in Zoan." This is the very place where Joseph was sold a slave, and where Moses did his wonders. \_\_Psalm lxxviii. 43. This was almost the only place where we have been in danger from the
 inhabitants. They are a wild race, and our Arabs were afraid of them. You would have been afraid too, if you had seen, out at the door of our tent, our Bedouins keeping watch all night, with their naked sabres gleaming in the moonlight, firing off their 
g
un now and then, and keeping up a low chant to keep one another awake. No evil happened to us; we feel that many pray for us, and that God is with us. This day our journeying on camels commenced, and continued till we came to Jerusalem. It is a strange mo
de of conveyance. You have seen a camel kneeling. It is in this condition when you mount. Suddenly it rises, first on }{\fs14\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057  }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
its fore feet, and then on its hind feet. It requires great skill to hold yourself on during this operation. One time I was thrown fairly 
over its head, but quite unhurt. When you find yourself exalted on the hunch of the camel, it is somewhat of the feeling of an aeronaut, as if you were bidding farewell to sublunary things ; but when he begins to move with solemn pace and slow, you are re
minded of your terrestrial origin, and that a wrong balance or turn to the side will soon bring you down }{\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 from }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
your giddy height. You have no stirrup ; and generally, only your bed for a saddle; you may either sit astride or as on a side saddle; the latter is the pleasanter, though not the safer of the two. The camel goes about three miles an hour, and the }{
\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 step is }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 so long that the motion is quite peculiar; you bend your, head toward your knees every step. With a vertical sun above, and burning sand below, you
 may believe it is a very fatiguing mode of journeying. However. we .thought of Rebecca and. Abraham's servant, Gen. xxiv., and. listened with delight to the wild Bedouin's plaintive song. That night we slept at Menagie, a Bedouin mud ,village; palm trees
 and three wells. and an ocean of  sand, formed the only objects of interest.
\par 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\tx360\tqr\tx5041\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 25}{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\super\langnp2057 th}{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 .  \_ Up by sunrise, and proceeded as before. The }{
\fs28\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 only }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 event this day was. Dr B.'s fall from his camel, which greatly alarmed us. He had fallen asleep, which you are very apt 
to do.  We encamped, and used every restorative, so that we were able to proceed the same evening to Gonatre, a miserable Arab post, having a governor ; \_ not a\_
 tree. the bold Philistines; no more the children of Simeon ; no more Isaac and his herdsmen ; 
no more David and his horsemen; but miserable Arab shepherds, simple people without ideas ; poor, degraded, fearful. Khanoonis was the first town we entered; Scripture name unknown. The burying\_
ground outside the town, the well, and the people coming. to d
raw, were objects of great interest to us. The people were highly entertained with us in return. We sat down in the Bazaar, and were a spectacle to all. How much we longed to have the Arabic tongue, that we might preach the unsearchable riches of Christ i
n
 God's own land. Same evening we heard the cry of the wolf; and encamped 2 miles from Gaza. The plague was raging, so we did not enter, but spent a delightful day in comparing its condition with God's word concerning it, "Baldness is come upon Gaza." The 
old city is buried under sand hills without a blade of grass, so that it is bald indeed. The herds and flocks are innumerable, fulfilling Zeph.. ii. Andrew and I climbed the hill up which Samson carried the gates.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 5th. \_ Passed through \_a fine olive grove 
for many miles, and entered the vale of Eschol. The people were all in the fields cutting and bringing in their barley. They reap with the hook as we do; they seem to carry in at same time upon camels. N}{\fs16\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 o }{
\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 vines in Eschol now ; no pomegranates, but some green fig trees. Crossed the brook Sorek, dry; spent the mid\_
day under the embowering shade of a fig tree ; tasted the apricots of the good land. Same evening came to Doulis, which we take to be Eshtaol, where Samson was born.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 6}{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\super\langnp2057 th}{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 . \_ We went due cast, and after a mountain pass, saw 
the hills of Judah; an immense plain intervening, all studded with little towns. From their names we found out many Bible\- spots. This valley or plain is the very vale of Zephatha, of which you read 2 Chron. \_\_"}{\fs8\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057  }{
\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 In the plain of Sephela." Before night we entered among the hills of Judah \_\_ very like our own Highlands\_and slept all night among the mountains, at a deserted village called Latroon.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 7th. \_ One of the most privileged days of our life. We broke up our tents by moonlight. S
oon the sun was up. We entered a defile of the most romantic character ; wild rocks and verdant hills ; wild flowers of every colour and fragrance scented our path. Sometimes we came upon a clump of beautiful olive\_trees \_\_
 then wild again. The turtle's vo
ice was heard in the land, and singing birds of sweetest note. Our camels carried us up this pass for 4 hours; and our turbaned Bedouins, added by their strange figures to the, scene. The terracing of all the hills is the most remarkable feature of Judean
 
scenery. Every foot of the rockiest mountains may in this way be covered with vines. We .thought of Isaiah often wandering here, and David and Solomon. Still. all was wilderness. The hand of man had been actively employed upon every mountain, but where we
re these labourers now ? Judah is gone into captivity before the enemy. There are few men left in the land; not a vine is there. "The vine languisheth."
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 We came down upon Gorieh, a village embosomed in figs and pomegranates. Ascending again, we came down i
nto the valley of Elah, where David slew Goliath. Another long and steep ascent of a most rugged hill brought us into a strange scene\_a desert of sunburnt rocks. I had read of this, and knew that Jerusalem was near, I 
left my camel and went before, hurrying over the burning rocks. In about half\_an\_hour Jerusalem came in sight. }{\fs8\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 11 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
How doth the city sit solitary that was full of people!" Is this }{\fs8\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 11 }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
the perfection of beauty!"  "How hath the Lord covered the daughter of Zion with a cloud in his anger ! " It is 
indeed very desolate. Read the two first chapters of Lamentations, and you have a vivid picture of our first sight of Jerusalem. We lighted off our camels within the Jaffa Gate. Among those that crowded round us, we observed several Jews. I think I 
had bet
ter not attempt to tell you about Jerusalem. There is so much to describe, and I know not where to begin. The Consul, Mr Young, received us most kindly, provided us a house where we might spread our mats, and helped us in every way. Mr Nicolayson called t
he same evening, and insisted on our occupying one of the mission houses on Mount Zion. The plague is still in Jerusalem, so that we must keep\_
 ourselves in quarantine. The plague only communicates by contact, so that we are not allowed to touch any one, or
 let any one touch us. Every night we heard the mourners go about the streets, with their dismal wailings for the dead. On Sabbath, Mr Nicolayson read the prayers, and Dr B. preached from Isaiah ii. 2. Dr K. preached in the evening. Three converted Jews w
ere among the hearers ; Lord Claude Hamilton, stepson of Lord Aberdeen, &c.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 On Monday, 10th, we visited the Sepulchre \_\_ a painful sight \_\-
where we can find no traces of Calvary. Same evening rode up the Mount of Olives ; past Gethsemane, a most touching spot. Visited Sir Moses Montefiore, a Jew of London, encamped on Mount Olivet ; very kind to us.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 11th. \_ Went round most of the places to be visited near Jerusalem \_\_ Rephaim, \_\_ Gihon, \_\_ "Siloa's brook that flowed fast by the oracle of God," \_\_
 the pool of Siloam, \_\_ the place where Jesus wept over the city,\_\_ Bethany \_\_ of all places my favourite, \_\_ the tombs of the kings. Such a day we never spent in this world before. The climate is truly delightful. Hot at mid\_
day, but delightful breezes at morning and evening.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 12th. \_ A business day ; getting information about Jews. In the evening, walked to Aceldama, a dreadful spot. Zion is ploughed like a field. I 
gathered some barley upon it, and noticed cauliflowers planted in rows. See Micah iii. 12. Jerusalem is indeed heaps. The quantities of rubbish would amaze you; in one place it was higher than the walls.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 13th. \_ We went to Hebron. 20 miles south. Mr Nicolayson, his son, the Consul and lady, accompanying us \_\_ all on mules and horses. Judah's cities are 
all waste; except Bethlehem, we saw none but in ruins till we reached Hebron. The vines axe beautifully cultivated here, and make it a paradise. The hills all terraced to the top. We spent a delightful evening and all next day. We met the Jews and had an 
interesting interview with them. We read Gen.. xviii., and many other Bible passages, with great joy. Saw the mosque where the tomb of Abraham and Sarah is.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 14th. \_\_ Returned by Bethlehem to Jerusalem. Bethlehem is a sweet village placed on the top of a ro
cky hill, very white and dazzling; you see it on both sides of the hill. At Rachel's sepulchre, you see Jerusalem on one hand and Bethlehem on the other, an interesting sight, 6 miles apart. On Sabbath *we enjoyed the Lord's supper in an upper chamber in 
Jerusalem. It was a time much to be remembered. A. B. preached in the evening in John xiv. 2, 3.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 17th. \_ Hebrew service at 6. Synagogues of Jerusalem. Curious interview with a Jew at the old wall of the temple.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 18th. \_ The plague has been* increasing, so 
that we think it better to depart. Last visit to Gethsemane, and Bethany, and Siloam. Evening took farewell of all our friends in Jerusalem with much sorrow you may believe. Went due north to Ramah, by Gibeon, and slept at Beer again in our tents, in Benj
amin.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 19th \_
 Passed Bethel where Jacob slept. Passed, through the rich and rocky defiles of Ephraim, by Lebonah to Sychar. You cannot believe what a delightsome land it is. We sought anxiously for the well where Jesus sat. Andrew alone found it, and lost h
is Bible in it.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard\plain \s15\qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {20th. \_\_
 Had a most interesting morning with the Jews of Sychar. Saw many of them, also the Samaritans, in their synagogue. Same evening visited Samaria \_\_ a wonderful place and encamped at Sanoor.
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 21st. \_ Arrived at Carmel, where we now are ;\_\_
 encamped within 2 yards of the sea. We have to be in quarantine here 7 days, as there is no plague north of this. Several English are encamped here, Lord Rokeby, Lord Claude Hamilton, &,c. We have daily }{\i\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
conversazion\'e8s}{\i\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057  }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 sitting on the sand. We are not allowed to touch even the rope of a tent. Acre is in sight, across the bay. We have delightful bathing. To\_
morrow Lord H. leaves, and kindly offers to take this. Carmel's rocky brow is over us ; we are all well and happy. On Monday we propose leaving for
 Tiberias and Saphet; soon we shall be in Beyrout, and on our way to Smyrna. Do not be anxious for me. Trust us to God, who goes with us where we go. I 
only pray that our mission may be blessed to Israel. Sir Moses M. has arrived, and pitches his tent within 50 yards of us. Give my kindest regards to all I love, and that inquire after me, not forgetting dear Willie. Your affectionate son,
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\tqr\tx5053\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs16\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 ROBT. M. }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 M'CHEYNE,
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 1 will try and write both Mr Candlish and Mr Moody .by this opportunity. The\_ only thing I think of mentioning is, that the affair of Aden seems premature.

\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 We were }{\fs20\ul\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 strongly}{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057  advised }{\fs14\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 in }{
\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 London by Mr M'Neill not to make any attempt there at present. The Arabs are very jealous in their religion; and Aden can scarcely be securely in possession yet.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 28th. \_ Still all well, \_\_ bathing daily in the sea. Tomorrow is our last day of quarantine. The therm. is about 86\'ba at mid\_day, 78\'ba
 at midnight; the sea about 76\'ba. May every grace and joy be given you.
\par }}