{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar 
\f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author Firstec Customer}{\operator Firstec Customer}{\creatim\yr2001\mo11\dy24\hr19\min55}{\revtim\yr2001\mo11\dy24\hr20\min1}{\version4}{\edmins6}{\nofpages2}
{\nofwords1326}{\nofchars7562}{\*\company  }{\vern57443}}\paperw11907\paperh16834\margl720\margr720\margt1077\margb1077 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \sbknone\linex0\headery709\footery709\colsx709 {\*\pnseclvl1
\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang
{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \qc\nowidctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\b LETTER XIX.
\par 
\par TO HIS FATHER AND MOTHER.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar 
\par \pard \qr\nowidctlpar\tx3705\tqr\tx4906 BUCHAREST,
\par \pard \nowidctlpar\tx3705\tqr\tx4906 
\par \pard \nowidctlpar\tx-1418\tqr\tx10490 MY DEAR FATHER AND MOTHER, \tab 10th Sept. 1839.
\par \pard \nowidctlpar\tx3555\tqr\tx4906 
\par \pard \qj\nowidctlpar {\scaps I do} hope that my letter to Eliza from Galatz would relieve you of much of your anxiety on my account. I write again so soon, not that I have any thing very new to communicate, but merely to assure you how well I 
am keeping, or rather kept, by the care of my heavenly Father. We left our quarantine of 7 days on Friday the 6th inst. \_
 a pleasant day, just like one in our own country. A quarantine is just like a prison. You are enclosed within a certain space by a wooden railing. You live in a solitary room, where there is nothing but a table, and some boards in the shape of a divan or
 sofa. {\i A guardiano }is set over you, to see that you touch nobody, and also to bring you provisions. We were all smoked the first and second day; our clothes being fumigated for 24 hours. The English Vice\_
consul at Galatz came twice to see us, and kindly invited us to his house when done. He is a Scotchman, by name Charles Cunningham, brother to the proprietor of Bonnington Mills \_
 educated at the Old High School. He took great pleasure in recalling past scenes in which we shared.
\par \pard \nowidctlpar 
\par \pard \qj\nowidctlpar We felt like birds escaped from a cage when, after being examined by the doctor, we were let go. The Consul's drosky soon brought us to his door. Galatz is a singular town;
 in many parts paved with wooden planks, like the American Corduroy. The houses mostly of wood. The Wallachians and Moldavians are singular\_
looking men.  In winter they wear a small fur cap of white or black. In summer, a broad black hat, which looks very odd. The hair is left, like Apollo's, unshorn, and hangs, black and matted, on the shoulders, or sometimes in
 graceful ringlets. They seem very gentle and submissive \_
take off their hats whenever you approach. Altogether, the character of the peasant approaches that of servility. Galatz is a thriving town, the port of Moldavia. The Jews are very numerous, and we p
aid an interesting visit to them. The same evening we rode down to lbraila in the Consul's drosky, himself accompanying us on horseback. He has a pleasant house there also. Nothing could exceed his kindness, and we tried to return it as best we might, by 
leading him to think of the unsearchable riches.
\par \pard \nowidctlpar 
\par \pard \qj\nowidctlpar We had ordered the post for the next morning; and accordingly, at an early hour, 3 carriages, having 4 horses each, were at the door. I am afraid you will think the deputation have gone out of their mind when you read of such style;
 but this is the only way of posting in this country, and had you seen the equipage, I think you would have been amused. The vehicle is a low cart, made of wood and wickerwork, set without springs upon 4 low wheels of wood. Four small horses are attached 
by ropes to the pole. The cart is filled with straw, among which you lie as you best can. Such wretched vehicles I never saw. To add to our dismay the day was rainy, the first we have seen since leavin
g England. The Consul insisted on our staying all day with him, and sent back to Galatz for his covered carriage, called Brashovanka, that we might proceed more comfortably. This gave us opportunity to visit the Jews of Ibraila, whom we found deeply inter
esting. It is a clean town, nicely built, with broad streets. The Jewish, Russian, and Greek, are the chief costumes.
\par \pard \nowidctlpar 
\par \pard \qj\nowidctlpar The same evening, at 9 o'clock, we set off for the capital of Wallachia. We were all three snugly lodged in the Brashovanka \_ a vehicle wh
ich it is not easy to describe. Twelve horses were yoked in, and we soon left Ibraila far behind. I had my feet up, and my coverlet about me, so that I was quite comfortable all night. The Wallachian drives with enormous speed \_
 dashes over their vast plains often at full gallop. We stopped and breakfasted next morning in a small cottage, just like a Highland one, the gentle Wallachians standing by wondering. They gave us plenty of milk, and 
we had brought other necessaries with us. Their language contains a great deal of Latin. They are supposed to be descendants of the Roman colony planted in Dacia. "{\i Domine, da buckshish," }was the postilion's demand \_ " Sir, give a present." "{\i 
Cuin latra}," the peasant cried \_ "The dog barks." "{\i Canis latrat}." "{\i Domine, nosti Romanisti?" \_ " }Sir, do you know the Roman language?" one man asked. This is a source of great amusement. Again we flew over the uncultivated plain \_
 away, and away, like the wind. The 12 horses we exchanged for 8, being more handy. There are no inns upo
n the road, and scarcely any houses. We came through only two villages in the 120 miles. The day was very fine, and we enjoyed it much. At the post the horses were often to seek, and as we could not speak the language we could not hurry them, so that we w
ere delayed long beyond the usual time, and it was two o'clock on Sunday morning before we rattled into the streets of this city. We found a khan with great difficulty; and, wrapping ourselves in our mats, were soon asleep.
\par \pard \nowidctlpar 
\par \pard \qj\nowidctlpar A khan is a curious place. This one was of large dimensions, having an area of nearly an acre. The ground floor is the resting\_place of the horses and carriages; the second floor for passing travellers;
 the third floor for those who stay six months. Such curious groupes were gathered on the Sabbath morning when I looked out! The Russian, with his light hair and light blue eye \_
 fierce and blunt. The Greek, with his showy red coat and picturesque trousers; and the dark-moustachioed Wallachian. We could not spend a very profitable Sabbath
 here, and, accordingly, removed to Khan Simeon, a quieter and smaller. one. The Greek is the only faith of Wallachia, and the Sabbath is not at all observed. We had a visit from Mr Colquhoun, Consul general, the same evening. He is the proprietor of Finc
astle, on the Tummel, a relation of Principal Macfarlan, and a real Scotchman \_
 a very pleasant gentleman. We have dined with him every day since. We have learned, since our arrival, that Dr Keith and Dr Black visited this place. This is a pity, as it is a 
waste of money and of our time; but we had fully agreed that they were to write us if they visited it. Either they did not write, or their letter has miscarried. However, God may have some end in thus making us doubly search this place.
\par \pard \nowidctlpar 
\par \pard \qj\nowidctlpar We have had most interesting interviews with the Jews. It is their feast of the new year, and of blowing the trumpet, and casting their sins into the river. There are about 3000 Jews here. The city has 120,000 inha
bitants, and 366 churches. It is built on a plain. Today we were present at a religious ceremony on the Prince's birthday. It was in the metropolitan church \_ a gaudily painted church - very
 handsome. The Prince Meloch, at present here an exile from Servia, attended by several nobles, was present;
 also the Consuls of the different nations, in their uniforms. The Prince of Wallachia, being unwell at the time, was not present. There was a vast number of lighted candles. The priests went round and round. Many prayers were said and sung. Th
e dresses were very splendid, with silver and gold. The crowd was very great\_
all standing. We, being British, were brought forward among the officers. The chief people afterwards came forward and kissed the cross, the Bible, and the priest's hand, taking 
the bread of the Supper. When all the gay people were gone, we stayed behind, and saw the poor going through their superstitions. An open silver coffin was displayed, and in it a dead body appeared to be wrapped up in cloth of gold. 
One skinny hand was disp
layed, and a cross beside it. A little plate was placed at the feet to receive donations. The worshippers first kissed the ground, some 3, some 30 times. Then approaching, they kissed the hand of the dead saint and the cross, and the priest touched their 
forehead. Our hearts sickened as we looked on. Officers, ladies, and peasants, all pressed forward. The saint is Saint Demetrius. When will the time come that light will break in here?
 The Consul offered to present us to the Prince at the levee, which we declined. In the afternoon we had a most interesting interview with a Rabbi from Corfu, and a full opportunity of laying before him the gospel of the grace of God.
\par \pard \nowidctlpar 
\par \pard \qj\nowidctlpar I must hastily conclude this letter, as I have to take it to the Consul's, and we leave for Jassy to\_night in our Brashovanka. I fear,  mamma, you will hardly learn the name. I am now quite well; I do not know that I 
have felt better since leaving England. How long it may be so, our heavenly Fattier only can decide; and into whose hands could I 
commit my soul and body more joyfully? Oh, may it be that you all know Him, each for his own! Andrew is quite well, and pressing me to have done. We are grieved to hear that Dr Black was seriously unwell when here. He is now on the Danube., They have had 
three times longer quarantine than we. We reach Foxani by to\_
morrow evening, where we shall rest, and see the Jews. Sixteen hours more will land us in Jassy, if all goes well. May. the Lord watch over you both, and over dear Eliza, and Willie, and my flock;
 and may Israel soon be saved, and so my desires are ended. Your affectionate son,
\par \pard \nowidctlpar 
\par ROBT. M. M'CHEYNE.
\par }