{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar 
\f4\fs20\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author Firstec Customer}{\operator Firstec Customer}{\creatim\yr2001\mo11\dy24\hr19\min50}{\revtim\yr2001\mo11\dy24\hr19\min55}{\version2}{\edmins5}{\nofpages1}
{\nofwords657}{\nofchars3745}{\*\company  }{\vern57443}}\paperw11907\paperh16840\margl720\margr720\margt1077\margb1077 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \psz9\sbknone\linex0\headery709\footery709\colsx709 {\*\pnseclvl1
\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang
{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \qc\nowidctlpar \f4\fs20\lang2057 {\b LETTER XVIII.
\par 
\par TO HIS SISTER, IN CONTINUATION.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar 
\par \pard \qr\nowidctlpar\tqc\tx3690\tqr\tx4959 GALATZ, {\i Sept.} 1, 1839.
\par \pard \nowidctlpar\tqc\tx-1276\tqr\tx10490 MY DEAR ELIZA,\tab ON THE BANKS OF THE DANUBE.
\par \pard \nowidctlpar\tqc\tx3690\tqr\tx4959 
\par \pard \nowidctlpar\tx390\tqr\tx4959 THIS letter should have gone from Beyrout, but I suppose you have received, or will soon receive, my letter from Smyrna, telling you of my long and dangerous 
fever, from which it has pleased God to recover me entirely. I still feel weak sometimes, but am perfectly well in mind and body. The voyage has done me a great deal of good\_quite reviving me and the cool atmosphere of 
Europe makes me feel quite another being., We have great cause to thank God, and to serve him better in days to come, and to prepare more fully for an eternal world.
\par 
\par \pard \qj\nowidctlpar You cannot imagine a kinder home than Bouja was to me. It was with unfeigned regret that I left them.  What a wonderful providence that I should be guided there. I 
left on the day I wrote, 24th August. Mr Lewis came on board with me. Since then, I have rapidly gained strength. We sailed up the Dardanelles all Sunday, through the English fleet
, and by sunset were in the sea of Marmora. Next morning by 5 we were anchored in the splendid bay of  Stamboul. It is a wonderful place. Such a dazzling city I 
never saw before. Andrew and one of the missionaries were soon on board, and we were glad to meet again. I 
went on shore till 12. At that hour we sailed, and were soon stemming the current of the Bosphorus. Such a lovely sail! You would have enjoyed it much. The coast may be said to be lined with palaces; but alas, wh
at are they but the dwellings of sin and wretchedness, doomed to sink with the sinking empire! The Black Sea was very rough as we entered it \_
 a wild tossing sea; but next day (the 27th August) it was like a sea of glass. We landed at Varna, after passing the Balkan mountains; \_ the same evening we passed the Cape of Kalakria.
\par \pard \nowidctlpar 
\par \pard \qj\nowidctlpar 28{\i th}. \_ At 12 o'clock we were in the Danube, after passing two mouths. "The dark rolling Danube" is very like the Forth as you go up to Stirling. The number of musquitoes is dreadful. A Prussian prince was on board \_
 an infidel \_ with whom I had long, long discussions of great interest.
\par \pard \nowidctlpar 
\par \pard \qj\nowidctlpar 29{\i th}. \_ We landed at Galatz, and put ourselves in quarantine for 7 days. This is the fifth day, so that we have 2 more. I 
shall describe a quarantine some other time. On Thursday we go to Galatz, and thence to Ibraila. The Consul invites us to sleep at his house. Friday we go to Bucharest (20 hours), then back to Jassy. We are forbidden to enter Russian Poland, and therefore
 go to Brody, then to Cracow, then to Berlin. Such is our present thought.
\par \pard \nowidctlpar 
\par \pard \qj\nowidctlpar Your joint letter was a great joy to me. I thank God, without ceasing, for his goodness to you all, and to my dear flock. The deaths you mention were all expected by me, except Dr G.'s daughter. The newspapers I 
have never got read till yesterday. It has been a glorious Assembly. I do hope the Aden Mission will not be proceeded in at present. Moldavia is a strange land. I sometimes think of the gladiator's "rude hut" that lay by the Danube. I see plenty of "D
acian mothers and young barbarians all at play." Tell all my friends the reason of my not writing them. I shall try and make up for it now. How I wish I had you, dear Lizzy, to enjoy with me my renovated life. I 
feel like one come back from the grave. Give my best love to dear Willie. I am glad he feels better. Keep the heart with all diligence. Seek to advance in grace, and this will be joy to your affectionate brother,
\par \pard \nowidctlpar 
\par ROBT. MURRAY M'CHEYNE.
\par 
\par \pard \qj\nowidctlpar 3{\i d Sept}. \_ To\_night we have been freed from quarantine \_ all well. I am thankful to say that I still continue to improve. The Consul of Galatz invites us to breakfast to\_morrow;
 and has provided two vehicles to carry us to Ibraila to\_
morrow evening. He is going with us. His name is Cunningham, from Edinburgh. The Consul at Bucharest is also a Scotchman, a good, kind man, a friend of the Jews. God bless and preserve you all. This
 letter should have been sent from Beyrout more than a month ago. The letter I wrote from Smyrna, which should reach you long before this, will explain why it was not. I am thankful to say that I am now quite recovered from my illness;
 and though a little weak before breakfast, still I am quite well. We are now in the cool air of Europe \_ (I know mamma will be glad) \_ in Galatz quarantine north of the Danube. My deafness is much better, \_ still I 
am a little deaf. If you have written to Warsaw, we will write for your letters. Write to Berlin. Do not put any thing about the deputation on our letters. The Austrians are very suspicious.
\par }