{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1 \deff0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f195\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f196\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f198\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f199\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}
{\f200\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f201\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f202\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f203\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}
{\f204\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f206\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f207\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f208\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f209\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}
{\f210\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;
\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author Haslam}{\operator Haslam}{\creatim\yr2001\mo11\dy3\hr16\min8}{\revtim\yr2001\mo11\dy3\hr16\min44}{\version4}{\edmins10}
{\nofpages3}{\nofwords1971}{\nofchars11239}{\nofcharsws0}{\vern8269}}\paperw16834\paperh11909\margl1080\margr1080\margt720\margb720 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\horzdoc\dghspace120\dgvspace120
\dghorigin1701\dgvorigin1984\dghshow0\dgvshow3\jcompress\viewkind1\viewscale84\viewzk2\nolnhtadjtbl \fet0\sectd \lndscpsxn\sbknone\linex0\sectdefaultcl {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2
\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang
{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \qc \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\tqr\tx4977\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 LETTER V.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\tqr\tx4977\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\tqr\tx4977\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs16\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 TO HIS SISTER.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\tqr\tx4977\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs16\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }{\fs12\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 GENOA, }{\i\fs16\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 24th April 1839,
\par }{\fs16\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\tx2760\tqr\tx4977\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs16\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 MY DEAR ELIZA, \tab \tab }{\fs12\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 HOTEL DE CR0IX DE ST MALTE.
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs16\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 THIS }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
letter is to be addressed to you, as I suppose you will be returned from Dundee by the time this reaches beloved Scotland.  
My dear people and all of you have been much on my heart during these days, and you may be sure I am anxious to know how the sacrament was conducted in St Peter's  -  how all my friends were helped in their services  - 
 and if there were marks of good done to perishing souls.  Ah, dear Eliza, every step I take, and every new country I see, makes me feel more that there is nothing real, nothing true, but, what is everlasting.  The whole world lieth in wickedness.  
Its judgments are fast hastening.  The marble palaces, among which I have been wandering tonight, shall soon sink, like a mill\_stone, in the waters of God's righteous anger.  But he that doeth the will of God abideth for ever.  
Happy, you and I, dear Eliza, if we have part in Christ, for we shall stand with him in glory when all the world shall sink in ruins.  I wrote to Mamma when sailing down.  the Rhone.  I have no doubt you have traced ou
r progress on the map, and have a complete acquaintance with our route.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 In a few hours after finishing that letter we safely reached Avignon in a lovely evening.  
Avignon is the place where the Popes chose to build their palace ; it is a city of palaces -  "The arrowy Rhone" is there a splendid stream  -  broad, deep, and rapid.  A ruined bridge of, stone half spans the stream.  
Beautiful spires, and ruined towers, rise above the rocks ; and the snowy Alps beyond complete the scene.  The whole sail down the Rhone is one of the grandest in the world.  We intended to proceed to Marseilles
 the same night by Diligence, near 70 miles, but could not get places.  I entrusted my letter to a gentleman's servant to put in the post, and we agreed to proceed by the same steamer 
down the Rhone, in hopes of reaching Marseilles by sea early on Sabbath morning.  The government packet for Malta was to sail on Sabbath at 5 evening.  We sailed in sweet moonlight, and slept at Beaucaire.  
At 4 in the morning we sailed again to Arles, and then in another steamer still further down the Rhone.  We grieved thus to use the Lord's day; but felt it a case of necessity, and tried to make good use of our time.  We soon gave tracts to all on board
 - mostly French, one German, one Italian, one English - all received them anxiously, rich and poor, passengers and sailors.  It was my, Sacrament day in St Peter's, and my heart was with my flock.  It was a lovely sunshine morning.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 About 9 we reached the Mediterranean, when all of a sudden a wind, called }{\i\f1\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 Maestral, }{
\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 sprung up with great violence.  Frenchmen lose all self\_
possession in a storm; and it was really amusing, if it had not been dangerous, to see how they ran about; one ran for the anchor, another for the cable, another to the helm ; all was confusion.  In a fe
w minutes we were driven close upon the shore, and were soon safely moored upon the desolate bank.  We all disembarked and spent our Sabbath on the desolate island, the  \sect }\sectd \lndscpsxn\sbknone\linex0\sectdefaultcl \pard\plain 
\ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\tqr\tx4917\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 captain not daring to unmoor the ship.  About a dozen of fishermen's
 cabins, with a fig tree in their garden, and a vine over their door, a herd of asses, and a waste of}{\f1\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057  }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 rushes, formed the scenery of the place.  
The natives speak a mixture of French and Italian, which we could with difficulty understand.  They seemed not to know the Sabbath from another day; some we found training their vine before their cottage door.  
We sat under a bush and read the account of Paul's shipwreck }{\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 on }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 Melita, Acts xxvii.  28, and on the whole spent a quiet and delightful Sabbath.  Our course is ent
irely in God's hand, so we felt quite resigned to stay there, assured that this delay would in some way turn out for his glory.  Mark how often the Apostles were hindered from going to places where they had fixed to go, Acts xvi.; so we wish to be guided
.  We could not Preach to the poor people, or we would have done it, but we sent a tract to every house.  The engineer of our boat was an Englishman, and gladly helped us in this.  
We commended ourselves and all, we love to our heavenly Father, and slept on the floor of our cabin very comfortably.
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\i\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 Mediterranean, 2}{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 2d April, Monday.  \_ The wind had greatly lulled.  
At 5 we were under weigh on the tideless sea; we sailed along the bleak coast.  Soon it became bold and rocky, till Marseilles came in sight, the hills in
 the background reminding us of " Scotia's darling seat." The country around is finely variegated and spotted with white villas.  The town is strongly fortified ' }{\f1\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 and }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
we sailed far into its majestic harbour, amidst a forest of masts from every country under heaven, about 8 o'clock morning.  
We were strictly examined at the Custom House, a most disagreeable part of travelling in this country; I was thankful when we got to our comfortable inn.  We called on one of the Protestant ministers, M.  Monod, a fine young man.  
There are 150,000 people in Marseilles  -  nearly 2000 Protestants \_ 3 pastors, who preach by turns to the same congregation.  They have a Sabbath school and day school.  They were very dead till two years ago ; since then God has given them living pasto
rs, and the work of grace is commencing.  We called on the Rabbi of the Jews, and introduced ourselves ; he was an intelligent looking Frenchman of 40, exceedingly polite to us.  His wife -  sat in the room.  
There are 1000 Jews in Marseilles; few learned; few attached to their religion ; most devoted to commerce.  Dr Black carried on a most interesting discussion with him, in which we joined as we were able.  We went to the Synagogue with him - 
few were present.  One Rabbi read prayers.  then another concluded the service; at one time all prayed in silence.  I prayed along with them, that God would take the veil away from the heart of Israel.  
Called same evening on Mr Hayes, a nice English gentleman, who gave us much information; two of the pastors were present; we stirred them up in the cause of Israel.  
I forgot to mention that the government packet had sailed, and we agreed to go by the boat of to\_morrow, which goes to Genoa, Leghorn, and Civita Vechia.  Marseilles is entirely a business town, yet a pleasant place; th
e air is truly delightful, very hot at mid\_day, but pleasant morning and evening.  The houses are very tall, the streets more regular than other French towns ; one street has the ambitious name of Rue de Paradis.  
Alas, I fear there are few that tread the narrow way here; yet I remember Elijah and Martin Booz, and am thankful.
\par 
\par }{\i\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 Marseilles, 23d }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 April  -  On board the Sully at 11.  Fine steamer, \-people of all nations on board, Italian, English, French, Flemish, Swiss, German.  
Hot, hot sun, and a cloudless sky.  Andrew and I got a delightful cabin on the deck to ourselves.  We sailed out of the harbour, and through the rocky islets that are in front of Marseilles.  We coa
sted along; the precipitous banks are high, bold, verdureless; a whitish rock, a deep blue sea below.  To the south without any bound to the eye.  We began the reading of Italian with some spirit; thought of Paul's determination, Rom.  i.  
15, and prayed it might be ours.  We must now lose ten days before proceeding to Malta, and we have resolved on spending them in enquiring after the Jews of Italy.  
We would rather have been on our way to Palestine, as the hot weather is setting in ; but God himself has shut us up to this course, and we hope he will bless us in it.  
We passed Toulon, the bay of the French navy, the place where Napoleon first pointed his cannon.  The town lies low on the beach, as most Italian towns do; bare rocky hills form the back ground, with a circular olive valley down to the town.  
In the evening we passed the pleasant Islands of Hyeres, resorted to by invalids on account of their delightful climate.  Dr Keith pointed out to us the place he was sent to for his health, where the month of January was quite delightful..  
It is a lovely land, but gross darkness covers the people.  The sun set sweetly behind the hills of Provence,  - we thought upon the martyrs of the Alps, and on Felix Neff.  The moon shone most beautifully, bringing silvery smiles out o
f the dark waves of the Mediterranean.  The sea is perfectly calm like a lake, and I find my health always improved on the water; my palpitation then entirely ceases ; the bustling haunts of men bring it back.  
We had evening prayer in our cabin, and soon after committed ourselves to repose.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\i\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 24th April, Wednesday. - Awoke on }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 the coast of Italy.  
Alps descending steeply into the sea; many a sweet valley revealing itself, Strange hanging villages, with their graceful churches, often appear on the brow of the hill
, oftener on the shore; the number of towns and villages is incredible, and there is never one without a spire.  The papists know the true principle of church extension.  To provoke a smile, I 
have a good mind to describe our breakfast, dear Eliza, but I believe it would be impossible.  
It begins with different kinds of fish, then eggs dressed in various ways, then mutton, beef, chickens, messes without a name, young peas and potatoes of this year, oranges, figs, nuts, and fruits of all kinds ; the only beverage was wine.  How happy I 
shall be to get back to plain fare again.  Oh, for a cup of tea! I thought within myself.  At 1, we entered the glorious Bay of Genoa, or rather Genova, for now we must speak Italian  }{\i\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 O
 bianche palazzo di Genova ! Such }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 a glorious sight I never saw before.  You remember the town beside Dunolly.  
I forget its name.* Imagine it spread out into a circular bay of many leagues, and instead of a row of humble houses.  imagine huge piles of marble buildings rising above one another, handsome spire
s, fantastic columns, and noble mountains behind, all green with olives, and all the heights spotted over with white marble villas; the bay filled with water of the deepest blue,, and an Italian sky above, and you see Genoa.  
We were carried ashore in a swift boat under a pleasant awning, and tried our Italian upon the sailors.  We asked for the British Consul.  }{\i\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 \'94O Sapiamo - Sapiamo !\'94, }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
they cried.  The narrowness of the streets strikes me very much.  In the older streets carriages could not go.  In the }{\i\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 Strada nuova }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 there is just room for two to pass.  
They are very cool and shady, like Benares.  Most of the houses have piazzas, and entrances and staircases of pure white marble - many houses are entirely marble.  In the moonlight they look inexpressibly soft and beautiful 
 ; some houses are of red plaster, some with paintings on the outside, which give too showy a look for my humble taste.  The white veil worn by all the women is most beautiful; it covers the back part of the ' head and the shoulders, and comes over the b
reast; `some wear it of bright variegated colours.  The number of priests is very remarkable they swarm.  There are from 90,000 to 100,000 inhabitants; 30 English, 150 Swiss, 250 Jews.  We called on the Consul, who was very kind, and on the Swiss minister
.  We call on the Jews tomorrow, and sail in the evening for Leghorn.  May the Lord go with us! We care little for sights if we cannot do any thing in our great mission.  At Leghorn there are 24,000 Jews.  
We hope to see Rome and the Jews there this week, and be back to Civita Vecchia in time for the Malta steamer.  The steamer we are in goes only to Naples.  Our hearts groan for this land of darkness.  You cannot form any idea of it.  
We dared not bring a single tract with us  - into Genoa.; we would have.  been put in prison immediately, and all our books burned.  If a Catholic were converted, and wanted to join the Protestant worship, they dare not receive him.  
And yet the people are gay and smiling.  Poor careless Italians! they sit still and are at ease.  Leghorn is a fr
ee port, and we hope great things may be done there ; the engineer of the Sully is a nice Irishman ' and has agreed to receive tracts and distribute them to all passengers going from or into Italy.  
By a wonderful providence, all engineers are British, and Protestants ; we have contrived to interest them a good deal in the great cause.  I must now close, }{\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 as }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 it is midnight.  
I am mercifully preserved in health, as are all my companions.  Andrew is sometimes a little sick at sea, but it soon wears off.  Dr Keith hurt his foot in Paris, which troubles him a little.  
Dr Black is indefatigable, and stands all his fatigues wonderfully.  I do trust you are all well, and that I shall hear from you soon.  }{\i\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 Poste restante, Alexandria, }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 I 
fear, will be too late unless you have sent.  Let Andrew's friends know.  Commend me to Dr Russell and lady.  The spy\_glass is in constant use; and Andrew sometimes steers by the compass..  Commend me to Mr Candlish and all that enquire for me.  
May you and I he kept abiding in the Beloved to the end - nothing else is worth possessing.  Your affectionate brother,
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }{\fs16\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 ROBT.  MURRAY M'CHEYNE.
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 I fear Mamma will not find all the domestic particulars she would like in my letters.  My clothes have answered well hitherto.  I shall certainly ad
opt the native costume if we find it very hot.  I miss my quiet cup of tea, and supper of oatmeal, most of all.  We are getting burned in the complexion a good deal.  We read the 17th of Revelation to night; I never saw it so full of meaning before.  
Oh the blessing of a pure preached ,gospel, of a simple faith }{\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 in }{\i\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 Jehovah Tzidkenu ! We }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 met some monks to\_
night, with their bare heads and brown.  garments.  Love to Willie; kind regards to Moody; I hope they do not forget us; it is a hard enterprise, and we need divine grace and strength every hour.  }{\i\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
Vale, vale, o mia sorella ! The }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 very children here speak Italian !
\par }}