{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1 \deff0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f193\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f194\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}
{\f196\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f197\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f198\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f199\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}
{\f200\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;
\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}}{\info{\author Haslam}{\operator Haslam}
{\creatim\yr2001\mo11\dy3\hr15\min52}{\revtim\yr2001\mo11\dy3\hr16\min28}{\version7}{\edmins13}{\nofpages2}{\nofwords984}{\nofchars5612}{\nofcharsws0}{\vern8269}}\paperw16834\paperh11909\margl1080\margr1080\margt720\margb720 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\horzdoc\dghspace120\dgvspace120\dghorigin1701\dgvorigin1984\dghshow0\dgvshow3\jcompress\viewkind1\viewscale84\viewzk2\nolnhtadjtbl \fet0\sectd 
\lndscpsxn\linex0\sectdefaultcl {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}
{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \qc \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\tqr\tx4900\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs16\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 LETTER II.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\tqr\tx4900\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs16\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\tqr\tx4900\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs12\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 TO THE SAME.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\tqr\tx4900\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs12\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\tx765\tqc\tx4125\tqr\tx4900\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs16\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 MY DEAR FATHFR, MOTHER,\tab }{\fs12\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 HAMPSTEAD HEATH,
\par \tab }{\fs16\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 AND SISTER, \tab }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 9th April, 1839.
\par 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs16\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 I }{\fs12\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 HAVE }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 received your kind letters, and only grieve at their being so short.  I am 
thankful to perceive that you are all well.  I heard of you also to\_day.  from Andrew Bonar and my }{\i\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 compagnons de voyage.  I }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
am wonderfully well in spite of all the toils of a London life, which are neither few nor small.  I never was in a place like London
 before; and were it not for the great kindness and considerate watchfulness of the kind lady with whom I stay, I believe I would have been fairly knocked up by this time.  On the 30th March I made my first entry into London with Mrs Tate.  We drove throu
gh Regent's Park, and I admired its seeming palaces, which also reminded me of the whited sepulchres.  I called on Sir George Sinclair, but he was out.  Surveyed St James's Palace, which you know is a grave\_
looking building, like some of our Canongate palaces.  Walked through Burlington Arcade and the Quadrant - 
called on Mr Nisbet, the bookseller, and Mr Hamilton, a Scottish elder, who has been the kindest person in London (out of this house) to me.  We returned late, and I heartily tired.
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\i\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 Sabbath, March }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 31.  \_ Being a little fatigued, I went to the Hampstead churches - 
first to the chapel.  Mr H.  preached, evidently a very good man, though needing much to be roused up into life and energy.  Afternoon, went to the parish church.  Heard one of the curates.  Saw the Baptismal Service  - far too long \_
 too many kneelings, and the absurd signing with the cross on the forehead of the child.  The sponsors, too, seemed ignorant clowns.  I fear there is a sore evil here.  Evening spent quietly.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\i\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 Monday, 1st }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 April.   - Into
 the City by 2.  Went with Mr Hamilton to Mr Waghorn, a singular blunt Englishman.  He called our expedition a trip - 
pointed out the easiest route in a trice, and was done.  I could fix nothing till I knew the resolve of my Fathers.  Called on Mr Andrew Bon
ar, one of the merchant princes of this great city.  Very kind; invited us to dine on Saturday.  Riding some miles further, called on Dr Crombie, Scotch minister  - 
serious, pleasant young man.  He agreed to print Mr Candlish's Statement, and to call a prayer meeting of all the congregations for Tuesday.  Called on a rich Jew - made little of him.  Wrote Mr Candlish.  Rattled a long way to Manchester Street \_
 dined and spent the evening with the Wettells.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 2d April \_ Stayed at home all day to recruit mind and b
ody.  This city wears away all my thoughts and feelings.  Palpitation, which had left 'me, returned in some measure yesterday and this day.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 3d April \_ Into the City by 2.  Called at Tract Society, who have granted us as many tracts as we please, and all t
he help in their power.  Went through St Paul's \_
 paced up and down its splendid area went over the marble statues of departed heroes.  Was especially pleased with that of the first Bishop of Calcutta baptizing two Hindoos, all beautifully carved.  Also Bishop Heber kneeling - 
the marble of his gown very like silk - newly erected.  It is a glorious edifice, but more for looking at than for use.  Walked along Fleet Street and Strand, guided by Mr Hamilton \_ Exeter Hall.  Saw Secretary of the Jewish Society.  His
 daughter married to Ewald, missionary at Tunis \_ said all his family will write.  Poor man! he will be disappointed, now that we are not going by Africa.  }{\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 .  He }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
seemed.  a 'godly man, and a lover of Israel'.  Walked round Westminster Abbey, and was awe\_struck by its grandeur, Had not time for the inside - rode to Haverstock  - Mr Hamilton's \_
 dined there with Mr Macmorland, minister of Irving's old church.  Edward's fall was a great blow to the Scottish Church here.  We must do something for the Church here.  It
 is of vast importance.  There are said to be 100,000 Scotchmen in London, yet few cleave to the church of their fathers.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\tx1725\tqr\tx4914\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 4th April.  \_ Into the City by 12.  Then to Bethnal Green, several miles farther.  There is no end to this }{
\fs14\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 W}{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 ilderness of houses.  Called on Mr Cartwright, Secretary to London Jews' Society, Palestine Place kindly received \_
 conducted through the schools for Jewish children.  Saw 45.  boys at their dinner.  They afterwards read some Hebrew to me and sung a hymn in Hebrew, Worthy the Lamb" \_ the chorus was very sweet,  [HEBREW], \_
 slain for us." In the other school, saw 28 girls \_ pretty Jewish faces.  They sung the 111th Psalm in Hebrew, responding to one another in the true Hebrew style.  It was very sweet.  Saw the chapel where they hav
e a Hebrew service every Sunday afternoon \_ a Jew is to be baptized next Sunday evening.  City again.\tab Introduced to an American Jew \_ a colonel who has been in Palestine lately - very communicative and kind \_
 quite a gentleman ; seemed to think the Jews will
 be very friendly to us.  Another rich Jew present gave me a piece of unleavened bread.  I left them, saying, I hope we shall bring no evil to Israel;" they replying, No; we hope you will bring much good." Dined at Mr Macniell's, the Persian Ambassador.  
He and his lady very kind - full of clear information.  Advises us to go from Aleppo to Constantinople by land.  Mrs T.  and daughter with me.
\par 
\par }{\i\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 Friday, 5 th }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 April \_ Snowy day.  Drove to West End, \_ called on Dr Welsh and Mr Dunlop.  The latter went with me to
 Sir George Grey, who had appointed to meet me at 2.  Very pleasant man \_ very kind \_ 
very quick in dispatching business.  In five minutes we were on our way to the Foreign Office, where I left Sir George's letter and my card for Mr Backhouse.  City.  Heard the Cathedral Service in St Paul's \_ was solemnized by it \_
 beautiful singing.  Called on Mr Saul, a converted Jew, who did not know what to do or say for joy because we were going to Jerusalem.  "I have not found so great faith, no,, not in Israel!" Went to the Synagogue with Mr H.  About 500 Jews present \_
 all hats on -  a hollow murmur or muttering of prayers was going on.  Suddenly the Rabbi, on a raised platform lighted with large tapers, burst into a loud chaunt.  Sometimes the whole assembly started to their feet and joined with loud voices \_
 sometimes three voices sang alone, a splendid chaunt, all in Hebrew.  I could catch a word now and then.  Visited another synagogue much more splendidly fitted up, quite new \_ 200 or 300 present.  The same kind of se
rvice going on.  I thought on the Valley full of dry bones.  I longed that they would ask me to speak to them.  "Men and brethren, say on!" Wrote down a prayer for the coming of the Saviour, painted on the wall.
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 6th April.  My kind hostess insisted on my taking the play  - 
visited, with her, the Colosseum, a truly wonderful panorama of London.  My head felt quite giddy, and I feared to look over, lest I should fall from the top of St Paul's - visited the Polytechnic.  Met James Mackay and Mrs Gordon.  Rode round Hyde Park 
\_ called on Mrs Wetten.  Dined at Mr Bonar's, Chester Terrace.  Very kind people.  Two Misses Hope there  - very kind.  One promised me many letters, and to introduce me next day to Baptist Noel.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 7th April \_
 Quiet Sabbath.  Walked in to Mr Noel's.  I now begin to know London quite well.  Heard him preach with great power and talent, on the fear of God and fear of man.  Afterwards saw the Communion dispensed, with which I was much pleased.  It was very simple
 and solemn.  Found Mr Noel a very pleasant man - very kind and interested about our mission.  Afternoon, heard his curate, Mr Garret, and liked him better even than Mr Noel, though the church was not one\-
third full.  In the morning, hundreds had to stand.  Evening quiet.  London is not nearly so bad on the Sabbath as I expected.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 8th April \_ Called on Misses Hope \_ found several friends of Israel \_ many letters and kindnesses.  Called on Sir R.  Inglis  - 
not at home.  Quiet evening at home.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\tx315\tqr\tx4923\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 9th April.  \_ Went to Mr Nesbit's and heard of my fellow \-
travellers.  Found them in the City; all happy to meet.  Went to Mr Waghorn's and Foreign Office.  Dined at Mr Nesbit's.  Solemn meeting in Regent Square Church ; many converted Jews and friends of Israel present.  T
wo ministers read and prayed, and Dr Black gave an address.  Now I sit down to give you an account of all.  Andrew is looking thin, but is quite well.  I am much better, though a little wearied with incessant business.  I have many engagements for to\_
morrow; and we sail next morning for Boulogne.  I shall be glad when we are fairly off.  May God keep me humble, and prayerful, and holy.  I commend }{\fs22\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 you }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
all to Him day by day.  May He watch over you when I am far away, and over dear Willie.  I heard from Dundee to\_
night; all goes on well.  Surely God hath done great things for us, whereof we are glad.  I will write soon again.  Pray for me, your affectionate son and brother,
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 ROBERT MURRAY M'CHEYNE.
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\langnp2057 
\par }}